---
layout: post
title: "2019 Rewind"
excerpt: "Taking a look at my 2019."
categories: [personal]
image:
    feature: 
comments: true
---

2019 was a lot of things to me.

It was the year...
- I befriended some incredible people
- I reevaluated some other friendships
- I completed a year of living alone 
- I landed a really cool internship offer via campus recruiting
- I dove deeper into NLP and other areas of CS to better identify my own interests
- I got surprisingly good at foosball
- I was pushed far out of my comfort zone - which taught me quite a bit - as a developer **and** as a person  
- I felt the pressure to land a job
- I received my first job offer!
- I lived with some of my closest friends
- I celebrated with my closest friends, who also received really cool job offers!
- I wrote the last series of exams for my undergraduate curriculum
- I started <a href="https://instagram.com/adityadraws" target="_blank" style="color:blue;">my own instagram art account</a>!
- I survived a month of zero junk food
- I took the plunge into art and picked up many techniques
- And I hit a thousand followers on <a href="https://instagram.com/adityadraws" target="_blank" style="color:blue;">my art instagram account</a>, in 2 months!

----------------------------------------------------------------

Wow. Looking back, 2019 was likely one of the most eventful years of my life.

I'm sure many events will unfold soon as I move out of the hostel, dive into the industry, face the real world, but I did learn a lot over the last year.

I learnt many things about myself, the people around me, the things that need to change, and what I need to focus on next.

Off the top of my head, some of my takeaways from my personal experiences of the year were that -

- Communication skills can have significant impact. I learnt that clear, concise communication, aside from being generally welcomed by all, also enables me to make a much stronger impression with the people I interact with.

- It's important to not be too critical on oneself. Everyone makes mistakes at some point, and it's easy to forget that. 

- Hobbies are important. Aside from being an avenue to vent, relax or express myself - I've found that improving, or having a sense of growth or progression in regard to my hobbies, has helped me feel significantly more self-confident, and has also given me a reason to be constantly excited about the future.

- Delayed gratification for the win! Lasting a month without junk food enabled me to feel like I could do whatever I set my mind to - which is a pretty sweet feeling.

- Leave the comfort zone more often. This year, I was pushed far away from my comfort zone, in terms of technologies I worked with, and the domains I worked in. Every minute of those projects changed the way I approach problem statements, and I'm far more confident of solving real-world challenges now.

- Being nice goes a long way. From having people vouch for my skills when I didn't expect it, to having professors ping me to vet my interests in assisting them in their projects, I've found that being polite, respectful and diligent goes a long way.

- Breaks are okay. With all the goals I'd been chasing, I kept forgetting that I needed a break. Burnouts weren't uncommon. Thankfully, eventually I started recognizing burnouts and adjusted accordingly - but breaks are okay. Repeat after me. Breaks are okay.

- Execution matters just as much as content. This was a common pattern I noticed, across many different contexts. I learnt that even if I have content to share, or something to show, the professionalism of the way I did it in, influenced its reception significantly more than one would expect. (Now now, don't go all "Duh, Adi" on me - I was quite surprised by the extent of the influence of good execution)

- Friends and family matter. I had some low points through the year and they'd have been significantly lower without family and my closest friends. This year showed me that I may be better off having a close, tight-knit circle of best friends than a wider, loose circle of many acquaintances.

And finally,

- Everyone should check out <a href="https://instagram.com/adityadraws" target="_blank" style="color:blue;">my instagram art acco</a>- okay I'll hold off on the shameless marketing. 😛

I'm racking my brain thinking if there were any more generally applicable lessons I learnt and I can't think of anymore for now - so that's all folks!

Happy new year! 

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

For more of my work, follow me on:

LinkedIn: <span style="color:blue">[https://www.linkedin.com/in/adityaramesh1998/](https://www.linkedin.com/in/adityaramesh1998/)</span>

GitHub: <span style="color:blue">[https://github.com/RameshAditya/](https://github.com/RameshAditya/)</span>

Twitter: <span style="color:blue">[https://twitter.com/adityaramesh98](https://twitter.com/adityaramesh98)</span> 